---
title: "sHELL"
date: "29th Nov 2019"
---

I write a lot of shell code and it's actually my favourite programming language. If you use Linux, BSD or another UNIXy operating system, you may know of my (shell) work.

I created [neofetch](https://github.com/dylanaraps/neofetch), [pfetch](), [the Pure Bash Bible](), [the Pure sh Bible](), [fff]() and of course, KISS Linux.


## Language family

When I mention "shell" I am referring to the language "family" as a whole and not a specific shell. To be more specific, I am talking about the POSIX shell or shells which are some kind of extension of it.


## Shell is a bad and unsafe language

I've seen this and similar statements numerous times around the web, however I only partly agree.

I don't think the shell is bad nor do I think it is perfect. I see the shell as one of many tools and there's a correct time and place for each of the tools in your toolbox.

The biggest problem with the shell in my opinion is the lack of best (and safe) practises documentation.

I say this because it's so very easy to write shell code which looks *fine*, works (*now*) but is in reality unsafe, fragile and in some cases [dangerous](https://github.com/valvesoftware/steam-for-linux/issues/3671).

Further, the shell won't help you in the slightest. It'll happily run anything which isn't an upfront syntax error and runtime errors continue the program execution instead of aborting there and then!

The shell *is* a safe language if written "properly", however the programmer must know what unsafe shell looks like, why it is unsafe and how to avoid it.

Fun right?


## What makes shell code unsafe?

**unquoted variable -> word splitting -> globbing**

**empty variable -> no error -> oops**


## How can I write safe shell code?

**man bash**, **man dash**, **man "$SHELL"**

Your shell's manual is chock full of information related to the language as a whole. It can be a little daunting to read it "cover to cover" so I recommend using it as a reference while you code.

**shellcheck**

Run each of your scripts through [shellcheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/). Each warning and error shellcheck will yell at you about has a corresponding Wiki page. The pages explain each specific problem and even offer safe alternatives.

**set -e**

Adding this to your shell code will cause the shell to abort on any errors (*when the exit status is greater than 0*).

This only affects code which is **not** a part of the compound list following a **while**, **until** or **if** keyword, **not** a part of a **&&**/**||** list and not a pipeline starting with a **!**.

I don't always enable this as you can write safe code without it so long as you manually handle each possible error. There are also times when you may want to ignore errors and have to then append `|| :` to applicable code.
