---
title: "I've gone to great lengths for this silence"
date: "4th Nov 2019"
---

I've spent a lot of time ensuring this website remains small, simple and fast. To quote [Futurama](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Futurama) "When You Do Things Right, People Won’t Be Sure You’ve Done Anything at All". I've gone to great lengths for this silence.


## The generation process

This website is statically generated from a [simple shell script](https://github.com/kisslinux/website/blob/master/make) using [pandoc](https://pandoc.org/), with every page written in basic [markdown](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown).

As this site contains near zero images, I optimize each image by hand using [Compress or Die](https://compress-or-die.com/) and load a `webp` or `jpg` image depending on browser support.

Every page shares the same CSS style-sheet and I also minify this by hand. I've found that a lot of CSS minifiers actually *increase* the file size.


## Why is it fast?

Every page is only **a single HTTP request**\*. To achieve this, each page is entirely self-contained. A page is comprised of the HTML with the entirety of the CSS inlined in `<style>` tags.

As an example, the end result is a grand total of **3.0KB** for [getkiss.org](/) all contained in a single HTTP request.

**\*** With the exception of the Screenshots page.


## Analytics

**They don't belong here.** I don't know how many people visit this website nor do I know anything about you!

Besides, it'd be unfair for me to browse the web with [Ublock Origin](https://github.com/gorhill/uBlock) plus JavaScript disabled and then **track you** on my site.


## Removing the favicon

The favicon has also been put to rest. This isn't as simple as not setting one! All of the major browsers will request a favicon **even if one hasn't been set**.

The workaround is to simply inline a favicon in each page. Through a lot of tinkering I have found the smallest inline favicon which ensures **zero HTTP requests**.

Behold: `<link href=data:, rel=icon>`


## Fonts

No external fonts are in use. The body's `font-family` is set to `sans-serif` and will use whatever font is browser's default.


## JavaScript

No JavaScript is used anywhere on the website. It isn't needed and is therefore omitted. Each page is strictly a document comprised of information.


## HTML

The HTML is minified using a single `sed` command! I'll leave the dissection of the command to you, the reader. It's a fun exercise as `sed` is more powerful than people realise.

Behold: `sed ':a;N;$!ba;s|>\s*<|><|g'`


## CSS

As mentioned above the CSS is inlined in each page inside `<style>` tags and it is minified by hand. I use various techniques to reduce its size.

All unnecessary white-space is removed (`ul{display:block}`). This is arguably the easiest minification step to do yourself.

Shorthand rules are used wherever possible (`font:` in place of `font-*` and `background:` in place of `background-*`). A lot of these are circumstantial.

Classes are avoided and IDs are instead used. This is actually a HTML minification technique (`id=a` vs `class=a`). It's even better if you're able to stick strictly to styling HTML tags!

All colors used on this site have a 3 character long shorthand. This enables the use of `#fff` instead of `#ffffff`. This is really easy to do if [Web Safe Colors](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_colors#Web-safe_colors) are used.

The CSS on this website is still far from perfect however! The hardest minification technique (*at least for me*) is the **removal** of unused, unneeded or unapplied CSS rules. I'm still having fun with this one.


## Conclusion

I will continue to chip away the source of this site, however diminishing the end results may be. This is just who I am. If there's wiggle room, I'll wiggle.

The full un-generated source for this website can be found here: <https://github.com/kisslinux/website>


## Get in touch

If you have any further questions, feel free to [contact me](/pages/contact).


